# Progress report in Pen programming language

## July 17th, 2022

[@raviqqe](https://github.com/raviqqe)

---

# Agenda

- Progress report
  - Reference counting optimization
  - C calling convention (no progress)
- Next plans

---

# Progress report

---

# Reference counting optimization

- Fibonacci number is 25% faster than the previous version!
  - Now, it's 2 times slower than Rust... (with floating-pointer numbers)
- Static pointer tagging was preventing direct calls of global functions.
  - Now, Pen uses _static_ counts for statically allocated memory blocks.
  - Pointer tagging and un-tagging were not removed by LLVM's optimization somehow even with correct alignment of global variables.
  - Clang does it but at the level of CIL?
  - Removal of pointer tags also led to simpler static check of memory blocks.

---

# C calling convention (no progress)

- The Zig's developer says: https://twitter.com/andy_kelley/status/1527743699836280833
- LLVM's C calling convention is not the one used by C.
  - Linux on x86 uses the System V ABI.
  - LLVM handles only part of it.
    - Register spilling
    - Struct decomposition
- MLIR has it as C wrapper emission for the LLVM dialect.
  - Not released yet. Maybe in LLVM 15?

---

# C calling convention (no progress, continued)

- C backend again for F--?
  - [F--](https://github.com/raviqqe/fmm) is Pen's lower-level IR.
  - Currently, C backend doesn't support guaranteed tail call optimization.
  - [Clang's `musttail`](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/46765) needs function signature matching.
    - C's standard proposal also follows the same design for portability.

---

# Next plans

- Standard library improvements
  - More functionality
  - More completeness
- Application development?
  - Web application?
  - WebGL??
  - Currently, tail calls in WASM is only supported by Chrome (and Node.js.)
- Efficient C calling convention in FFI [#444](https://github.com/pen-lang/pen/issues/444)
  - Compiling to MLIR? Wait for LLVM 15?

---

# Summary

- Progress
  - Reference counting optimization
- Next plans
  - Standard library improvements
  - Application development?
